# Math intro
## Groups
A **group** is a fancy mathematical name for a set of elements that are related to each other. These elements are related through an operation called the **group operation**. This operation must be **associative** and have a **neutral element**. The number of elements in the set is called the **order** of the group.

> **Example**: the integers $\mathbb{Z}$ together with the addition form a group because addition is associative
> $$(a + b) + c = a + (b + c)$$
> and also they have a neutral element represented by $0$:
> $$a + 0 = a$$

## Finite groups
A **finite group** is a group where the set of elements is finite. An example of a finite group is the integers modulo $n$ and the operation addition. In modular arithmetic two elements $a$ and $b$ are equivalent if they have the same remainder modulo $n$. This is noted by $a \equiv b \mod n$.

> **Example**: 4 and 12 are equivalent modulo 8, because they have the same remainder when dividing by 8.
> $$4 \equiv 12 \mod 8$$

> **Example**: the integers modulo 8, noted by $\mathbb{Z}_8$, together with the modular addition form a group:
> $$(a + b) + c \equiv a + (b + c) \mod 8$$
> and also they have a neutral element represented by $0$:
> $$a + 0 = a \mod 8$$

## Multiplicative groups
When choosing $p$ as a **prime** number $\mathbb{Z}_p$ has an additional property. We can define the multiplication as usual, that is $ab \mod p$ is the result of multiplying $a$ and $b$ and taking the remainder of dividing by $p$. But if $p$ is prime, we also know that for all $a \in \mathbb{Z}_p$, there exist an element $a^{-1}$ such that $a a^{-1}=1 \mod p$. That is, every element has a multiplicative inverse and we can take $1$ as the neutral element. This is due to **Fermats little theorem**.

> **Example**: the integers modulo 7, noted by $\mathbb{Z}_7$, together with the modular multiplication form a multiplicative group:
> $$(a * b) * c \equiv a * (b * c) \mod 8$$
> and also they have a neutral element represented by $1$:
> $$a * 1 = a \mod 8$$

Note that addition and multiplication are also commutative. In this case, the groups are called **commutative or abelian groups**. A **generator** is an element $g$ of the group, such that when considering the set generated by applying repeatedly the group operation with itself, it generates all the group. Note that finite groups have a finite number of elements. Every element $a \in \mathbb{G}$ will eventually cycle and $a^i=a$ for some $i$. If $A=\{a^0, a^1, \dots, a^n\}$ are all the elements of the group, this is a generator. If $A$ is a subset of the elements of $\mathbb{G}$, this is called a generator of the **subgroup**.

## Finite field
A **finite field** is similar to a **group** but instead of only one operation it defines: addition, substraction, multiplication and division. As natural, substraction is the inverse of addition and the same applies for multiplication and division. The number of elements in the set is called the **order** of the field. Note that $\mathbb{Z_p}$ with $p$ prime, if we consider all the operations, can be viewed as a finite field noted as $\mathbb{F}_p$.

> **Example**: $\mathbb{F}_p$ has order $p$, and also has a multiplicative group associated with it of order $p-1$, when considering all non-zero elements.

## Further reading
- [An introduction to mathematical cryptography](https://link.springer.com/book/10.1007/978-0-387-77993-5)
- [Efficient Software-Implementation of Finite Fields with Applications to Cryptography](https://link.springer.com/article/10.1007/s10440-006-9046-1)
- To compute the multiplicative inverse efficiently, look into the [extended euclidean algorithm](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Extended_Euclidean_algorithm#:~:text=The%20extended%20Euclidean%20algorithm%20is%20the%20essential%20tool%20for%20computing,fields%20of%20non%2Dprime%20order).
- To compute the exponentiation efficiently, look at [Exponentiation by Squaring](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Exponentiation_by_squaring).
